graph LRO (#351)
Microsoft/api-guidelines: graph/patterns/longRunningOperations.md

operation.

There are two flavors of this solution:

- The returned resource is the targeted resource and includes the status of
    the operation. This pattern is often called RELO (resource-based
    long running operation).

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<p align="center">
  <img src="RELO.gif" alt="The status monitor LRO flow"/>
</p>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->

- The returned resource is a new API resource called 'Stepwise Operation' and
    is created to track the status. This LRO solution is similar to the concept
    of Promises or Futures in other programming languages.

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<p align="center">
  <img src="LRO.gif" alt="The status monitor LRO flow"/>
</p>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->

The RELO pattern is the preferred pattern for long running operations and should be
used wherever possible. The pattern avoids complexity, and consistent resource
presentation makes things simpler for our users and tooling chain.

In general, Microsoft Graph API guidelines for LRO follow [Microsoft REST API
Guidelines](https://github.com/microsoft/api-guidelines/blob/vNext/Guidelines.md#13-long-running-operations).

> A single deviation from the base guidelines is that Microsoft Graph API standards require that you use the following response headers:

Reviewer: Do we also want to call out that we are not allowing API producers to expose a tenant-level /operations resource (as the main API guidelines allow in https://github.com/microsoft/api-guidelines/blob/vNext/Guidelines.md#1324-operations-resource)

Author: Thank you! good point. will update the pattern

- The Content-Location header indicates the location of a RELO resource.
  - The API response says the targeted resource is being created by returning a 201 status code and the resource URI is provided in the Content-Location header, but the response indicates that the request is not completed by including "Provisioning" status.

- The Location header indicates the location of a new stepwise operation LRO resource.
  - The API response says the operation resource is being created at the URL provided in the Location header and indicates that the request is not completed by including a 202 status code.

## When to use this pattern

Any API call that is expected to take longer than 1 second in the 99th percentile should use the long running operations pattern.

How do you select which flavor of LRO pattern to use? An API designer can follow these
heuristics:

1.  If a service can create a resource with a minimal latency and continue
    updating its status according to the well-defined and stable state
    transition model until completion, then the RELO model is the best choice.

2.  Otherwise, a service should follow the Stepwise Operation pattern. 
 

## Issues and considerations

> - One or more clients MUST be able to monitor and operate on the same resource at the same time.

Reviewer: Should we use API consumer instead of client here, since the consumers of an API may themselves be services

```suggestion
- One or more API consumers MUST be able to monitor and operate on the same resource at the same time.
```

- The state of the system SHOULD always be discoverable and testable. Clients
    SHOULD be able to determine the system state even if the operation tracking
    resource is no longer active. Clients MAY issue a GET on some resource to
    determine the state of a long running operation.

-  The long running operations pattern SHOULD work for clients looking to "fire and forget"
    and for clients looking to actively monitor and act upon results.

-  The long running operations pattern might be supplemented by the [change notification
    pattern](change-notification.md).

-  Cancellation of a long running operation does not explicitly mean a rollback. On a per API-defined case, it
    might mean a rollback, or compensation, or completion, or partial completion,
    etc. Following a canceled operation, the API should return a consistent state that allows
    continued service.

-  A recommended minimum retention time for a stepwise operation is 24 hours.
    Operations SHOULD transition to "tombstone" for an additional period of time
    prior to being purged from the system.
    
-  Services that provides a new operation resource MUST support GET semantics on the operation.

> 

Reviewer: Should we allow the case where an API producer sometimes immediately completes an operation and other times returns an LRO?

Reviewer 2: :-) I think so, but Gareth disagrees.  We should have a longer conversation about this.

Author: I think that if API response takes long time for P99 then it should be LRO and edge cases may be treated as errors

Reviewer: In my opinion for the resource-based pattern it's OK if sometimes the operation completes immediately and other times it's a LRO as in the case the shape of the API response is the same. For the stepwise pattern, my thinking is if an API can return a LRO then it should always return an LRO (even if the LRO is created in the completed state) that way API consumers don't have to deal with two different shapes of response.

We may even want to consider a metadata annotation to make any API that uses the step-wise LRO pattern

Author: It's a good recommendation. Will add to the pattern

Reviewer 2: Boo ;-)

## Examples

###  Create a new resource using RELO

A client wants to provision a new database

```
POST https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/databases/

{
"id": "db1",
}
```

The API responds synchronously that the database has been created and indicates
that the provisioning operation is not fully completed by including the
Operation-Location header and status property in the response payload.

```
HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Content-Location: https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/databases/db1

{
"id": "db1",
"Status": "Provisioning",
[ … other fields for "database" …]
}
```

### Create a new resource using the Stepwise Operation

```
POST https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/databases/

{
"id": "db1",
}
```

The API responds synchronously that the request has been accepted and includes
the Location header with an operation resource for further polling.

```
HTTP/1.1 202 Accepted

> Location: https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/operations/123

Reviewer: We may want to avoid the creation of a root level operations resource since we don't have a way to do this for multiple workloads in Graph

```suggestion
Location: https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/databases/operations/123
```

```

### Poll on a Stepwise Operation

```

GET https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/operations/123
```

The server responds that results are still not ready and optionally provides a
recommendation to wait 30 seconds.

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Retry-After: 30

{
"createdDateTime": "2015-06-19T12-01-03.4Z",
"status": "running"
}
```
The client waits the recommended 30 seconds and then invokes another request to get
the results of the operation.

```
GET https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/operations/123
```

The server responds with a "status:succeeded" operation that includes the resource
location.

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK

{
"createdDateTime": "2015-06-19T12-01-03.45Z",
"lastActionDateTime": "2015-06-19T12-06-03.0024Z",
"status": "succeeded",
"resourceLocation": "https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/databases/db1"
}

> ```

Reviewer: Do we want an example of how to cancel and operation for both resource-based and stepwise

Reviewer 3: Stepwise cancellation is documented in the Microsoft API Guidelines.  RELO is not - I added the same comment earlier.

Author: Added a new RELO cancelation example

monitor the progress of the operation and have an ability to cancel it if
needed. The API needs to provide a mechanism to track the work
being done in the background. The mechanism needs to be expressed in the same
web style as other interactive APIs. It also needs to support checking on the status and/or
being notified asynchronously of the results.

## Solution

The solution is to model the API as a synchronous service that returns a
resource that represents the eventual completion or failure of a long running
operation.

There are two flavors of this solution:

- The returned resource is the targeted resource and includes the status of
    the operation. This pattern is often called RELO (resource-based
    long running operation).

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<p align="center">
  <img src="RELO.gif" alt="The status monitor LRO flow"/>
</p>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->

- The returned resource is a new API resource called 'Stepwise Operation' and
    is created to track the status. This LRO solution is similar to the concept
    of Promises or Futures in other programming languages.

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<p align="center">

>   <img src="LRO.gif" alt="The status monitor LRO flow"/>

Reviewer 3: Can't add comments to the diagrams - so adding here.
In the Location header it should be /operations (not /operation)

Personally I find the mix of "Resource" and /databases/db1 inconsistent.  Should the swimlane say "database"?

Author: Fixed images with correct JSON but hesitant to change Resource Endpoint to Database because the pattern name is RELO

How do you select which flavor of LRO pattern to use? An API designer can follow these
heuristics:

1.  If a service can create a resource with a minimal latency and continue
    updating its status according to the well-defined and stable state
    transition model until completion, then the RELO model is the best choice.

2.  Otherwise, a service should follow the Stepwise Operation pattern. 
 

## Issues and considerations

- One or more API consumers MUST be able to monitor and operate on the same resource at the same time.

- The state of the system SHOULD always be discoverable and testable. Clients
    SHOULD be able to determine the system state even if the operation tracking
    resource is no longer active. Clients MAY issue a GET on some resource to
    determine the state of a long running operation.

-  The long running operations pattern SHOULD work for clients looking to "fire and forget"
    and for clients looking to actively monitor and act upon results.

-  The long running operations pattern might be supplemented by the [change notification
    pattern](change-notification.md).

> -  Cancellation of a long running operation does not explicitly mean a rollback. On a per API-defined case, it

Reviewer 3: Can you provide examples of what this looks like for RELO?  
I have no idea what the request looks like to cancel RELO.  The Microsoft API Guidelines describe cancellation for LRO but not for RELO...

Author: Provided

    might mean a rollback, or compensation, or completion, or partial completion,
    etc. Following a canceled operation, the API should return a consistent state that allows
    continued service.

-  A recommended minimum retention time for a stepwise operation is 24 hours.
    Operations SHOULD transition to "tombstone" for an additional period of time
    prior to being purged from the system.
    
-  Services that provides a new operation resource MUST support GET semantics on the operation.

## Examples

###  Create a new resource using RELO

A client wants to provision a new database

```
POST https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/databases/

{
"id": "db1",
}
```

The API responds synchronously that the database has been created and indicates
that the provisioning operation is not fully completed by including the

> Operation-Location header and status property in the response payload.

Reviewer 3: Content-Location

Author: fixed

```
HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Content-Location: https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/databases/db1

{
"id": "db1",

> "Status": "Provisioning",

Reviewer 3: lowerCamelCase - feels rude saying that to another API reviewer :)

> "Status": "Provisioning",

Reviewer 3: So my nit with RELO is that we have this status property living on the resource in perpetuity, when really it's only of any use during the beginning of the resource's lifecycle.  I guess callers should use $select :)

Author: will omit for simplicity for now

[ … other fields for "database" …]
}
```

### Create a new resource using the Stepwise Operation

```
POST https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/databases/

{
"id": "db1",
}
```

The API responds synchronously that the request has been accepted and includes
the Location header with an operation resource for further polling.

```
HTTP/1.1 202 Accepted

> Location: https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/databases/operations/123

Reviewer 3: OK - this is problematic for me.  databases is a collection, so really this should be /databases/db1/operations/123.
Otherwise (with key-as-segment) is "operations" an ID for the databases collection?

But then that means that the database record is (at least partially) created.  In which case just use RELO...

I think for this mechanism /operations needs to be somewhere related but cannot be on the resource.

Author: added a top-level node in front of databases sot it will be /storage/databases/db1 or /storage/operations/123

    determine the state of a long running operation.

-  The long running operations pattern SHOULD work for clients looking to "fire and forget"
    and for clients looking to actively monitor and act upon results.

-  The long running operations pattern might be supplemented by the [change notification
    pattern](change-notification.md).

-  Cancellation of a long running operation does not explicitly mean a rollback. On a per API-defined case, it
    might mean a rollback, or compensation, or completion, or partial completion,
    etc. Following a canceled operation, the API should return a consistent state that allows
    continued service.

-  A recommended minimum retention time for a stepwise operation is 24 hours.
    Operations SHOULD transition to "tombstone" for an additional period of time
    prior to being purged from the system.
    
-  Services that provides a new operation resource MUST support GET semantics on the operation.
-  Services that returns a new operation MUST always return an LRO (even if the LRO is created in the completed state) that way API consumers don't have to deal with two different shapes of response.

> ## Examples

Reviewer 2: Add an example for a hybrid LRO.

Author: @darrelmiller while attempting to add hybrid model we identified that because the response headers contain both tatget resource URL and operation URL there is a need for the 'status' property on both resources. Otherwise a client can't determine if the target resource isn't ready by using GET on target URL. duplication of status property is an antipattern and would require additional sync work. Therefore we (Peter, Dan, Gareth, Olga) collectively decided not to include hybrid model in the pattern
